---
title: "Trait Diversity vs. Species Richness"
excerpt: "My opinions on diversity"
comments: true
header:
  image: /assets/images/rainforest.jpg
  caption: "[Photo credit: Wikimedia Commons](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:El_Yunque_panorama.jpg)"
---


A number of well-written popular science books have drawn attention to ecosystem degradation in the modern era (e.g., Kolbert’s “The Sixth Extinction”, Weisman’s “The World Without Us”, Wilson’s “The Future of Life”). Each highlight the result when high-quality habitat is developed over or degraded; in short, many species become extinct and the ones left behind are fundamentally changed. The popularity of conservation-minded books speaks, I think, to a noble interest on the part of the public to ‘save the environment’. For a lot of folks, that probably boils down to making sure pandas have enough bamboo to live happily in the wild. Nevertheless, these books emphasize the crucial message that change is needed if we are to rehabilitate healthy, diverse ecosystems.
I think you’d be hard pressed to find an ecologist that would state on the record to a lay audience that species diversity is overrated. In part, because good scientists aren’t given to hyperbolic statements as a rule. Second, because a public statement like that from a university setting would probably provide carte blanc approval to all sorts of questionable activities. Nevertheless, there has been some chatter in the ecology community lately aimed at answering two fundamental questions: “Is species diversity really the best measure for community health? Or ecosystem resilience?” As we learn more about the way that ecosystems work and handle perturbations (read: climate change), it seems that species diversity isn’t as great an indicator as we might wish. In some cases, it seems to be a relatively poor proxy to measure actual ecosystem function.

## The problem with species diversity

What’s wrong with species diversity? Well, for one, focusing purely on how many species you have ignores the evolutionary history that some species may share and assumes that all species are ecologically interchangeable. Although focusing on the raw number of species is a good place to start when asking about habitat quality and integrity, we can’t stop there.
An alternative approach might look at how many different niches, or roles, are being filled within an ecosystem. Under this framework, three different species that perform a similar function might be grouped together as a class rather than as separate species. In this view, a resilient ecosystem isn’t so much species-rich as it is trait-rich. Some researchers have argued that the benefits ascribed to species-rich communities1 are actually attributable to trait-diversity2. According to these folks, any assumed benefits of species-rich communities are a mathematical inevitability of increasing the pool of possible traits. Said another way: a pool of 100 species may have 30 traits represented, but a smaller pool would likely have fewer traits. To these scientists, a community of thirty unique species (in that each species fills a distinct niche with unique traits) is inherently superior to the 50-species community if most of those species have overlapping niches. This year, an article published inEcology Letters (a top-notch journal, by the way) called for the use of trait-diversity over species-diversity in managing degraded habitats. 3
How would that actually work in practice? Let’s say you are a land manager looking to restore a somewhat degraded 100-acre lot. Many resource managers follow species conservation plans put in place by local, regional and/or national governmental bodies. These plans typically boosting the abundance of declining native species through revegetation or reintroduction efforts. Later, further habitat improvements might be made—perhaps the removal of an invasive weed. Ultimately, management energies are entirely directed at enhancing species diversity within the habitat. In the trait-based paradigm, there would be a meeting to decide whichspecies were worth saving. Protection would be allocated to those species that meet a unique ecosystem need. If only one native species is a nitrogen-fixing plant, or only one has really deep roots to prevent erosion, then these “special” species would be targeted for protection. Less effort might be made to protect a particular species that shares a niche with several others.
The practicalities associated with this type of conservation program are problematic—but that doesn’t mean that it isn’t worth evaluating whether trait-based conservation methods serve their purpose more effectively. One problem that will inevitably arise is inherent in the process itself—What exactly are you trying to save here, anyway?—because attempting to maximize ‘functional traits’ invites people to ask what functions are worth managing. Many habitats have been shaped by humans over the course of centuries. An area that may have once been an active marsh in the 1500’s may have been filled in and used as the site of a historic building in the 1800’s. Thus, a present day restoration always has to contend with the problem of what to restore. When the disturbance event is in the distant past, there is inevitably pressure from multiple interest groups with divergent visions of a restored site.

## Interaction networks in a changing planet

While functional, or ‘trait’, diversity is one way to evaluate ecosystem health, it may not be appropriate in all systems. In particular, the strong patterns found in terrestrial rainforests are not observed in marine coral reef habitats.4 Another tack proposed by ecologists draws on species interaction networks. A litany of prominent ecologists have pointed out that when one species is lost from a system, the relationships between the extinct species and the rest of the ecosystem are lost.5 This phenomenon has hit the top of the food chain the hardest, resulting in less complex ecosystems in many parts of the world. Borrowing from network theory, the best way to promote ecosystem resilience might be to maximize “interaction diversity”. More work continues to be done in this vein, which is great because greater interactivity seems to correspond to increased network stability.6 I look forward to the day that conservation ecologists can try out large scale restoration efforts where interaction diversity is the metric that is measured and maximized. Again, it is possible (even probable) that interaction diversity will turn out to be an incomplete measure of ecosystem health just like species and trait diversity. Still, you can’t know whether something is a great (or awful) idea until it is fully tested.
     
### References

1. Tilman, D., Wedin, D. & Knops, J. Productivity and sustainability influenced by biodiversity in grassland ecosystems. Nature 379, 718–720 (1996).
1. Messier, J., McGill, B. J. & Lechowicz, M. J. How do traits vary across ecological scales? A case for trait-based ecology. Ecol. Lett. 13, 838–48 (2010).
1. Laughlin, D. C. Applying trait-based models to achieve functional targets for theory-driven ecological restoration. Ecol. Lett. 17, 771–784 (2014).
1. Robinson, J. P. W. et al. The limitations of diversity metrics in directing global marine conservation.Mar. Policy 48, 123–125 (2014).
1. Estes, J. A. et al. Trophic Downgrading of Planet Earth. Science (80-. ). 333, 301–306 (2011).
1. Rohr, R. P., Saavedra, S. & Bascompte, J. On the structural stability of mutualistic systems. Science (80-. ). 345, 1253497 (2014).

